 Good morning and welcome to the standing committee's meeting for Wednesday, May 14, 2025. All council meetings will be live streamed on the city's website, and for guest speakers, please do not turn off your microphones. Our first order of business is rule call. Will the clerk please take the roll? Mr. Sharlin? Here. Mr. Coghill? Here. Ms. Gross? Mr. Lavelle? Here. Mr. Mosley? Here. Ms. Kelsmith? Ms. Warwick? Mr. Wilson? Here. Ms. Strasburger, Chair? Here. Five members present. Thank you. Our next order of business is public comment. I would like to remind all speakers that rules of council state that comments are limited to matters of concern, official action, or deliberation, which are or may be before city council, and profanity will not be allowed. Please state your name and neighborhood for the record. You will have three minutes to speak. We do not have any registered speakers, so anyone who would like to speak can approach the podium. Good morning, Special Agent Sunshine. A little discombobulated this morning. After yesterday's meeting and discoveries, I heard a lot of talk about this diplomat who's out here raping one of his employees. I didn't mention his name, but I will now. Kareem Khan, Chief Prosecutor and Diplomat of the International Criminal Court. Imagine that. He's raping one of his employees. He's done it repeatedly for months, and they know about it and are protecting him because they think. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. His position as a diplomat is more important than his position as a prosecutor. Really? I praise God I'm not near him. I'd remove his head in Jesus' name with all the love in my heart. That's what I would do to him. Lord, please return the sinner in your good who has his curse sent towards me. 100 million billion trillion Google clicks. And whoever's sinning. Weren't you the sinner? You did? You full throats?? You don't wanna christ before you die. três Property, no do that, number two, please, they fix me, Lord. Lord have mercy upon us. Please, I have to make you see, Lord it's true. I aluminum plastic свид cooperate against traffic like this. with me? Why, when, how, everybody belongs where everything is that belongs to me, that has my real name on it. God blesses us so that we might bless others. In spite of everything that's happened to me still happening to me, I will continue to fight to be a blessing. Psalm 103 1-4 says, Bless the Lord all my soul and all that is within me. Bless his holy name and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities? Who healeth all thine diseases? Who crowneth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies? Dear God, thank you for your blessings. Please help me to remember the ways you have blessed my life when it seems to overwhelm me. I'm a little overwhelmed, but I'll be okay. So this woman, I will stand for her and for every woman that's being raped by anybody, regardless of their position, all over the world. I may be a product of incest in my family, but I will never live in guilt, fear, or shame. In Jesus' name, Amen. Thank you. Next speaker, please. Good morning. My name is LeVon F. Brown. I live at 715 Mercer Street in the Hill District. I brought this the other day, and I'm bringing it back again. For the homeless person, who lost this, and I guess it's because of the police, but here's your cup, and I have your money. Even if you don't want to come in there, a lot of homeless people say they don't want to come here. I'll meet you outside. You know I come at 10, Tuesday and Wednesday. But if you come, I have your money. And I'm still worried about what happened to this person, because you just don't really realize if you've got a policeman that's beaten the neighborhood. Whether it's a professional, either a being and she is telling you she needs help and other people that need help now miss harwick i had a problem with you whenever she brought the homeless white man that you while she's up here talking you went over to him and you did something and you went back and forth i keep telling you when the people are talking and you're we're talking and trying to think we only got three minutes and then you do that it's very distracting and then when miss smithhead was out here and her and the man was talking and the one man that comes and you do seem like he's really angry and he said be quiet the sergeant of arms automatically come to him it should be get miss smith and put her back where she's supposed to be you're supposed to be 90 years up here and then you got eight like mr codhill he really thinks that he's something he says he's taking care of business that's that willing and dealing you're supposed to be at the table and i'm tired of coming but i'm keep coming because someone got to tell you when you're doing wrong if you're not treating us with respect you don't even have to respect you in three minutes to get off your computers get off your tablets and put the phone down don't go sit over there you're supposed to be looking at us three minutes three what 360 seconds you can't even stay that long to listen to us but you'll talk amongst each other and you mr um you and codhill always is talking you need to stop it because it's very disrespectful when i went to school you couldn't talk when the teacher was talking and that's what you're doing i'm trying to teach you something because i don't know everything and you don't either but i know what's happening in my community if i tell you we could work together we could stop some of this stuff all i'm asking you is to listen to us don't read don't play you on your games or whatever listen to us please thank you very much next speaker please good morning good morning my name is howard h.p jackson black political empowerment project grew up with nacp all my life in pittsburgh uh i was here a couple months ago to talk about segregation in the education now i'm going to tell you a story about me roy irvis he was a great fighter in pittsburgh and then after he unsegregated some things in pittsburgh pittsburgh's been mississippi with blinders on and we've been programmed now let me give you the story about leroy irvis when he went left pittsburgh and he went to be at the capitol in harrisburg be a state representative and the influence of his seed was planted for four years he grew up in penny� metrics in pit jag and balck theta wda people were pouring heavily into Оthскогоë that helped marked on the Fluent Metro Cityобрitas system so we've probably lost them over two months after that which got nowhere overnight this is just huge process how can you preserve this relationship and I'm waiting to see if they might do something when they jump onto that mission by themselves i'm Ansalyn honestly i've never met a lot of者 where the youngers i know you've heard great fighters those that are venturing out is brain was planning for four state representatives to resurrect and come back to Pittsburgh to unsegregate the system. And what it is, I always loved the Ed Ganey administration. And then until I found out it was segregated. And you know what? I was at a rally a couple months ago, and we was out on Squirrel Hill, and we were protesting Republicans, what Trump has shook up the world with. Shook up the world. You know, the government, veterans for what I represent. The disappointment is the segregation. And you find out that someone is running against our mayor and getting Trump money. Republican money. And you know what? We already done been assumed with fear in Pittsburgh. Blinders of the Mississippi attitude of Woodrow Wilson, J. Edgar Hoover. But Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh's been segregated from the time I was growing up. I was 12 years old. I just turned 72 May the 3rd. Let me get you. Let me give you a point of what I done witnessed in Pittsburgh. And you grew up in Pittsburgh. And you still got blinders on to segregate this city again. I don't want to go back 60 years. You know what? I love the run and make. I've watched him grow up just going against our mayor. But it's a disappointment to find out the funding. I'm not here to see anybody buy a campaign. But I'm here about. Human rights. Human rights. I live in Wilkinsburg, but I can't vote in Pittsburgh because of my situation of being handicapped. But you know what the disappointment is? You've got to go ahead and take off those blinders and unsegregate like Columbus and the man that discovered the North Pole. Thank you very much. Thank you. Any further speakers? There being no further speakers, we will now move on to our standing committee's agenda. Our first committee is the Finance and Law Committee. New Papers, Bill 1802. Bill 1802, resolution authorizing the issuance of a warrant in favor of Lawy Ong in an amount not to exceed $8,971.17 over one year in full and final settlement of a plane for damage to his vehicle from an accident with a city police vehicle on July 29, 2020. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Discussion? Seeing none, all those in favor of Bill 1802, please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Affirmative recommendation, Bill 1803. Bill 1803, resolution authorizing the issuance of a warrant in favor of Harry Howe, Carah, Stefania, Jeffrey, Manager 3 Management in an amount not to exceed $3,493 over one year. full and final settlement of a claim for damage to rental property at the corner of Costco way and let a close street by a city of Pittsburgh environmental services vehicle on August 24th 2024 motion to approve second discussion seeing none all those in favor of bill 1803 please indicate by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation that moves us on to invoices is there a motion on invoices moved second discussion seeing none all those in favor of invoices please indicate by saying aye aye invoices are approved their motion on p cards a move second discussion I do want to note we need a waiver for a PLI item that is $6,000 so over the $5,000 limit you can see that we have a motion on the bill that moves us to approve the bill second discussion is that we need a waiver for a PLI item that is $6,000 so over the $5,000 limit you can see that we need a waiver for a PLI item that is $6,000 so over the $5,000 limit you can see that we need a waiver for a PLI item it's for PLI is quarterly payment to the state that we generally approve every quarter and it does require a waiver of the rules motion away of the rules second discussion all those in favor of waiving the rules to allow this charge please indicate by saying aye aye rules are part of a yellow paper on our nh 4 and juxtaposed with rather a structure on behalf of the city of Pittsburgh to enter into certain temporary construction easements in permanent right-of-way acquisitions on certain properties in the second and sixth Ward of the city in order to advance the Liberty Avenue highway safety improvement program cost for these temporary construction easements in right-of-way acquisitions shall not exceed six hundred eighty nine thousand nine hundred seventy dollars reimbursable at ninety percent for the first ninety thousand dollars and reimbursable at eighty percent for the remaining five hundred ninety nine thousand nine hundred and seventy dollars second discussion seeing none all those in favor of bill 1804 please indicate by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation bill 1805 bill 1805 resolution providing for a reimbursement agreement or agreement you may now present your application to the board of trustees you may now present your thank you seeing none all those in favor of Bill 1805 please indicate by saying by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation bill 1806 bill 1806 resolution authorizing acceptance by the city of pittsburgh of the dedication of portions of auburn street kalita drive in princeton place at no cost to the city located in the larmer east liberty phase one plan of lots as recorded in the allegheny county department of real estate and plan book volume 283 page 22 12th ward 9th council district motion to approve second discussion seeing none all those in favor of bill 1806 please indicate by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation that moves us on to human resources committee chaired by council person charlin bill 1797 resolution amending resolution number 18 of 2025 which authorized the mayor and the director of human resources and civil service to enter into a professional services agreement with upmc benefits management services inc doing business as work partners for services relating to providing third-party administrative services of the city of pittsburgh's workers compensation program costs not to exceed five million two thousand seven hundred sixty four dollars over the course of four years by correctly restating the amounts to be incurred annually with no change to the total amount motion to approve second discussion seeing none all those in favor of bill 1797 please indicate by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation that moves us on to land use and economic development committee chaired by councilman wilson deferred papers bill 1770 ordinance supplementing the pittsburgh code title 6 conduct article 1 regulated rights and actions chapter 609 weeds and grass by creating a new section 60908 managed natural landscapes to allow for the planting and maintenance of managed natural landscapes by residents motion to approve second discussion council member warbeck yeah i would actually like to hold for a couple weeks so um you know we uh we got you know obviously when it came in we talked with the autobahn society and a few others but when it made the news there were folks within pittsburgh and you know who wanted to weigh in so we're but i do want to say to all our fellow face점 network viewers that we will absolutely respond i believe that you're in a position well that's a good place yeah i mean i've been in ahe ast zaten future it's a really largemy on ag regard bill mcmune and we we're getting a bunch of newspapers out there that are talking I brought it into focus maybe it differently we were lost in our comfort zone because we hadn't had uh in our future cup этом that being our home but because um we're the same target Alzheimer's cancerirus so i believe that they allHealth care is a part of this collection job like the blurred poster but I also hope and will provide feedback on the Bill 1771 ordinance amending the Pittsburgh City Code Title 10 building chapter 1004 international property maintenance code adoption section 10402 changes specified to allow for the planting and maintenance of managed natural landscapes by residents. Motion to hold two weeks? Yep. Thank you. Second. Discussion? Seeing none. All those in favor of a two-week hold for bill 1771 please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Aye. Bill will be held for two weeks. That moves us on to recreation youth and senior services committee chaired by Councilwoman Kale-Smith. Bill 1807 resolution renaming the boundary street park located in central Oakland as the Oakland DIY skate park. Motion to approve? We have a hold for public hearing. Oh excuse me hold for public hearing. Second. Motion to hold for public hearing. Second. Second. We have a second. Is there a discussion? All I'll say is I've heard about this park from the people who started it. It's a great community-building project. I'm excited that the proposal is to make it official. Is this an interrogatory? Is this in your district Council installment? It's like that tiny little sliver in Oakland that's on the panther hollow. I just cannot say enough they spoke they spoke at an Oakland OPDC gathering community meeting few months back. and can't say enough good things about it. These Pitt students who have created a skate park out of such an empty park and, sorry, I know this is probably something you'll say later, but cannot support this project enough, so. Oh, and I do also wanna say a big shout out to Gary Schooley, who is the foreman for Shanley Park, because he is a former skater. I don't know if he still skates, but he has been a big help in making it what it is, it's really cool if you ever go down there. All right, any further discussion? Seeing none, all those in favor of holding Bill 1807 for a cablecast public hearing, please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Aye. Bill will be held. That moves us on to Intergovernmental and Educational Affairs Committee, chaired by Councilman Mosley. Deferred Papers Bill 1589, resolution authorizing the mayor and the director of the Department of Mobility and Infrastructure on behalf of the city of Pittsburgh to enter into a cooperation agreement with the Pittsburgh Regional Transit for post-construction ownership, access, and maintenance of certain city steps to be constructed around Downing Street in the sixth ward of the city of Pittsburgh at no cost to the city. Motion to approve. Second. Discussion? Madam Chair, yes please, hi, this is Councilman Gross. Yes. Can you hear me? Yes, Councilman Gross. Hi, sorry. I just had a meeting with Demi yesterday afternoon, so I apologize to you. I apologize to Councilman Mosley, the chair of the committee. My staff has a draft of an amendment, and I'll explain that the way it reads now, the legislative text makes it sound like we are giving permission to donate the steps that we own and we're going to rebuild to Port Authority, and that is not the intent. So there's a couple of quick strikeouts that I apologize we didn't get to you today that we agreed with Demi about, because what's going to happen is the Downing Street steps were closed and are gone. We're going to rebuild them, but we're going to flip them to face downhill and encroach like two feet onto Port Authority property. And so this legislative text is intended to create just the two or three foot, three foot, five foot, five foot, three foot easement with the Port Authority. So once we get a second look at it, we'll have an easy strikeout for next week. So if you wouldn't mind holding one more week, so we can actually get the text and double check it in front of you. Motion to hold. One week? Yes, thank you. Second. So second. So we have a motion and a second for a one week hold. Any further discussion? Seeing none, all those in favor of a one week hold for bill 1589, please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Aye. Aye. Will bill be held for one week? Thanks, Councilwoman. New papers, bill 1798. Bill 1798, resolution providing for reimbursement agreement or agreements with the Pittsburgh Water for costs associated with the Liberty Avenue HSIP project, where Pittsburgh Water will be responsible for paying 100% of the actual expenses involved in certain work to be described in the agreements. Motion to approve. Second, discussion? Discussion, Councilman Wilson? Yeah, I'm just curious, because there's several bills here, three. I believe they're all either in my district and shared with other people that are representing the other side of the street as well. I'm just trying to get a handle on what a bill like this means. Anyone here to speak to this? Good morning. Kim Lucas, director for the City of Pittsburgh's Department of Mobility and Infrastructure. So the bills that you're referencing today where we are entering into agreements with utility companies, when the city has a project and a utility has their asset in our right of way, they're required to accommodate our project. Sometimes it's more efficient for our construction crews that we're hiring to do that work and just pass along the cost to the utility company instead of having two essentially separate projects go in the same place where they get in, do their work, and then we get in. We just cover the actual construction. But they're, as you see here, responsible for 100% of the costs of incorporating that work into our contract. And the agreements are required by PennDOT for these projects that have grant funding within them. What type of work are we talking about? Sometimes this is utility relocations. Sometimes it's just improvement to their infrastructure. When the BRT was coming through, even though that's not our project, we requested the utilities go in and do a betterment project so that we weren't working with PRT to install this great new infrastructure just to have something underground fail and have to tear it out. So this is sort of the height of coordination with utility companies to make sure that we're not disrupting the right of way more than we have to. So if they see a main line that they, let's say the water company, they see a main line that they have scheduled to be replaced in five years, they would replace it now? You know, that's probably a case-by-case basis. That would be the ideal if they're able to, and we identify that as a potential conflict. But each of these projects is a case-by-case negotiation once you find out what's underground when you get into the design work. Okay. And they're, like the other entities are on board with this? Because I saw Duquesne Light as well previously. Yeah, I mean they're required to. When you have your assets in our right of way, you're required to do what you need to do with those assets. If the city has a project coming through, that will affect that. What level of, when you say required to, like what's the threshold that they would be required to? Now you're getting outside my knowledge base, so I'll have to follow up with you on that. I'm just saying. Yeah. Like when we, if we need them to relocate, we can make them relocate is my understanding. Interesting. What we need, one thing we need on Liberty Avenue is there's this one, this is a very Pittsburgh thing for me to do here, which is to pick out one part of the street and complain about it. There is a riser that's needed. It's the section between 16th and Cumberland. Okay. And then 16th and coming towards town. And I just feel, I almost want to see how many car accidents or missed accidents almost happen because it's like you go down and up, you can't avoid hitting the tire, you know, your tire hitting it. So it's just like when you pave the road, the road continually getting stacked up, you know, it continually gets higher. So they have to put a new riser on the mantle. Oh, I see what you're saying. Okay. I can certainly have our utility folks take a look at it. I'm sure. That section of Liberty, is that in the project? Let's see. That would be 16th going towards the bus station. So from 11th Street to Heron Avenue. So it would. Okay, great. All right. Looking forward to the project. Thanks. Thank you. Any further discussion? Seeing none, all those in favor of Bill 1798, please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Affirmative recommendation. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Okay, any further discussion on that section of Liberty. Bill 1799 resolution upon recommendation Bill 1799. Bill 1799 resolution providing for a reimbursement agreement or agreements with Pittsburgh Water for costs associated with the Smithfield Street phase one project where Pittsburgh Water would be responsible for paying 100% of the actual expenses involved in certain work to be described in the agreements. Motion to approve. Second. Discussion? Seeing none, all those in favor of Bill 1799, please indicate by saying aye. Aye. Aye. bill 1800 bill 1800 resolution providing for a reimbursement agreement or agreements with Pittsburgh water for costs associated with the Penn Avenue phase 2 project where Pittsburgh water will be responsible for paying 100% of the actual expenses involved in certain work to be described in the agreements motion to approve second discussion seeing none all those in favor of bill 1800 please indicate by saying aye aye affirmative recommendation Thank You director that concludes our standing committee's agenda we do have a few meeting announcements this afternoon at 2 p.m. council will hold a cablecast post agenda hearing on the safe passage program chaired by council person Warwick Thursday May 15th at 2 p.m. council will hold a cablecast post agenda on the 2024 annual comprehensive financial meeting in the city of Pittsburgh and the council will hold a cablecast post agenda on the 2024 annual comprehensive financial report and also on Thursday May 15th at 6 p.m. at the West End healthy active living center located at 80 Wabash Street Pittsburgh PA 15220 council will hold a cablecast public hearing on public safety and crime in the city of Pittsburgh public comment will be in person only and there will be no virtual option registration will close at 4 p.m. the day of the hearing due to the primary election on Tuesday May 20th council will hold both their regular and standing committees meeting on Monday May 19th at 10 a.m. and 1 30 p.m. respectively to register to speak at these meetings and hearings please fill out the signup form on the council meeting web page by the deadline you may also call the clerk's office at 4 1 2 2 5 5 2 1 3 8 is there anything from members from members I will entertain a motion to excuse the absent member approve the minutes and adjourn the meeting the second all those in favor aye meetings adjourned okay you you